[MUSIC PLAYING]
Do you ever find
yourself locked
in to totally nonproductive
styles of conversation
with the people closest to you?
Perhaps you have
a pattern of blame
or passive aggressive
behavior and can't
seem to find your way out.
If this is the case,
you may find today's
conversation extremely useful.
John Kinyon has
been a facilitator
in the modality
called nonviolent
communication for 15 years.
From couples to tribes
in Afghanistan and even
his own children, John
has mastered the skill
of taking the other
person's concerns
and needs into consideration
first before taking them on.
John is going to be doing
a couple of live sessions
in the studio today
to show us how
it works, beginning with me.
I'm a particularly bad traveler
in the eyes of the TSA people.
Mmm.
And that is because I become
confrontational with them.
Mmhmm.
I'm sure you haven't--
this is not the first
time you've heard that.
-Right.
Yeah.
-And everybody has their story.
Yada, yada, yada.
And it can become very complex.
And so in a little
bit, you can maybe help
me work through my TSA issues.
And-- but we have to want to.
I mean, this is really the
first tenant, isn't it?
Yes.
That we have to want
to change our behavior.
Right.
Yeah.
So it does take-- it does take
wanting to make that shift.
Because it's not easy.
But there is really-- what
I love about this approach
and what I've learned
is there really is a way
to change your inner state.
If you're angry, upset,
reactive, stressed.
There actually is a way
to shift that inside.
So that literally-- that
whole response and pattern
that goes off in
us can-- can change
to something more productive.
REGINA: Yeah.
Once you make the
choice to do it.
Once you make the choice.
Because something-- when
you're all ratcheted up,
there's something in us that's
like-- it's-- we're feeding
some kind of chemical process--
JOHN: Uh huh.
--that is-- has its
own self-gratification.
JOHN: Uh huh.
On some level.
JOHN: Yeah.
And we have to
choose to come down.
JOHN: Yep.
And disengage from that
cascade of chemicals
that we must be getting
something out of
or we wouldn't do these things.
-Yeah.
Yeah.
So definitely.
Once that-- especially
once it gets going,
it's hard to pull it
back and be able to have
that part of our
mind that wants--
knows that maybe that--
reacting that way
isn't going to get
us what we want.
REGINA: Right.
But in that moment,
it might feel
gratifying to be really angry
or righteous or like that.
But that-- it's sort of
accessing-- practicing
to access that part
of us the kind of
knows that that
isn't what's really
going to create what we want.
Isn't really going to
produce the world we want.
Well, it is interesting.
But when you get in those
kinds of situations or couples
who go head to
head in arguments,
we don't even, at
that point, care
if we're getting what we want.
JOHN: Uh huh.
We have totally
lost all perspective.
JOHN: Uh huh.
For the most part.
I mean, that's what happened.
JOHN: Just takes over. yeah.
Where this thing, these
chemicals, start taking over.
JOHN: Yeah.
And, well-- I
mean, we have time.
So if you want we
can-- before we
start getting into all the
explanations of how Marshall
Rosenberg began nonviolent
communication and all, which
we will get into.
We want to give some
background on that so people
understand the history of it.
But we can go
ahead, if you want,
and just kind of get right into
how you would work with someone
like me who has issues.
Yeah.
Sure.
I go through-- I go
through TSA twice a week
because I live in one state
and I work in another.
JOHN: Uh huh.
And I'm going
through an airport
that-- and you'll hear the
chip in my voice I'm sure.
JOHN: Uh huh.
That I consider to be extremely
punitive in its procedures.
JOHN: Mmhmm.
If you choose to opt out.
Mmhmm.
Which I don't want to go
through those machines.
JOHN: Mmhmm.
Mmhmm.
I don't--I mean, for
a variety of reasons.
I don't want to go
through those machines.
JOHN: Uh huh.
Yeah.
And so that's where it starts.
It's a-- I very politely
say, oh, opt out.
JOHN: Yep.
And then it starts.
OK.
Now you start your
engagement with personnel.
Otherwise you're just a
digit that moves through.
Your stuff moves through.
Put your hands up in
the air in the machine.
And you just go.
JOHN: Yeah.
You usually don't encounter
any further conversation.
But if you choose to opt out,
there's a lot of conversation.
So you want to work with that?
I can show you one
of our processes to--
REGINA: Yeah.
- --work with that.
-Yeah?
REGINA: Yeah, I
can work with that.
Yeah?
And then maybe
you can help-- help
me understand maybe the lack
of wisdom in my approach.
I mean-- because I'm doing
the kind of a dual purpose
thing in here when I start
getting a little mouthy
with them about
trying to re-educate
them on the realities of 9/11.
Which--
[LAUGHTER]
JOHN: Uh huh.
Isn't--
Isn't always warmly
received, maybe.
You know?
REGINA: It's not
always warmly received.
Yeah.
They're not thanking you for--
REGINA: You know what?
-Yeah?
Two people recently
have thanked me.
JOHN: Ah.
Two of the people
that have patted me
down actually asked what
the name of the book
was I was referring--
JOHN: Ah.
I was talking to-- about, in
this case, Judy Wood's book.
I've interviewed
a couple of times
and I have a lot
of respect for it.
So of course-- so for me
it's feeling violated.
JOHN: Uh huh.
I feel violated.
So I feel like we should--
none of us in this line
should have to be
going through this.
So it's a-- carrying a torch.
Well, let me show you how-- one
of our processes in our Mediate
Your Life training, this is
one that we-- if I was working
with you kind of as a
conflict coach or something,
I could kind of work with
you through through this.
And what I'm going to do--
there are three parts of it.
And as I go through those
parts, some distinctions
and communication language I'm
going to be kind of pointing
to as I'm working with you.
One has to do with separating
out what you observed,
kind of what happens--
REGINA: Mmhmm.
--from your thoughts
and beliefs and kind
of--your interpretations.
REGINA: OK.
Your story about it.
Just to keep that separate.
And often that's hard to do.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And another is your feelings.
So I want to talk
about your feelings.
But a lot of times we mix up
our feelings with our thoughts.
And so I'll be asking you
to kind of separate that out
and how I reflect back
what I'm hearing you say
and questions to ask.
And finally, to get to
what your needs are.
This language for the qualities
we all want as human beings.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
That we all want respect
or love or consideration.
Those things.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
But we often mix
that up with-- we
call the strategies,
the specific things
that we want to meet our needs.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Often that's all
mixed together.
So I'll be sort of piecing
that, kind of separating that
out as well as we're talking.
REGINA: OK.
-OK?
Yeah.
And we won't do an hour
session, obviously.
JOHN: No.
We'll just do a little quick.
Well, just-- get through it
in, you know, five, ten minutes.
JOHN: Yeah.
However long it takes for
me to get something through.
Right.
So let's start with this--
with the first part.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Which is what you experience
inside of yourself.
So you've said you
start to go through.
You say you want to
go through-- you don't
want to go through
the machine, you want
to go through the pat down.
And you-- then you
said that there
was a certain way that they
treat you that you don't like.
So some things that
you've perceived.
So say a few more
words about what-- what
happens that you don't like.
Well, I first go through
my own self-dialogue.
When I show up, I think.
OK.
Make this a happy day.
Right?
I mean, I'll talk to myself
about, let's just--let's just
sail through here.
It's probably going to be a
nice lady on the other side.
JOHN: Try to keep yourself.
Yeah.
Keep it positive.
And you'll attract something,
you know, a little more
reasonable on the other end.
And so I always start out
in a positive frame of mind.
JOHN: Uh huh.
And so I stand aside and wait
my turn to be called and taken
through for the pat down.
JOHN: Yeah.
And if the person
is also cheerful,
there's usually never any issue.
And I may still bring up, you
know, my thoughts and views.
I know it sounds ridiculous.
My thoughts and
views about 9/11.
-Yeah.
-Like some crusader.
Which is not a wise thing
to do if you're doing
it as often as I'm doing it.
But I may still find a way
to slip something in there.
So what do they do?
And what's just even
one thing that somebody
has done that you-- as
you're going through
that-- you really don't like.
What-- one thing
that happens that--
Usually they'll start
with a terse attitude.
JOHN: A terse attitude.
OK.
Very-- very-- where's
your stuff, ma'am?
You know.
Because it's always a choice
how you treat someone.
So it's the tone of
voice that that's--
REGINA: Tone of voice.
-Just like of few words.
REGINA: And then they come over.
And then some of--
And the body language
that goes with that.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
-OK.
So there's that--that
kind of way-- that level.
REGINA: That's the
starting level.
That's the starting level.
Now some of your--
REGINA: Yeah.
Now what are some
of your thoughts?
Because it helps to get
that out there kind of.
Just what do you-- what are
you telling yourself about?
That they're-- they're--
REGINA: They're being mean.
They're rude.
They're being mean.
REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
They're-- yeah.
So like that.
Say if you--
I'm feeling like they're
being unnecessarily harsh
or mean when they
don't have to be.
JOHN: Unnecessarily--
They could choose to be nice.
JOHN: Unnecessarily
harsh and mean
when they don't have to be.
-Yeah.
Yeah.
OK.
So that's an example
of something you're
saying to yourself about it.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Yeah.
There's the kind
of, what happens?
The body language,
the tone of voice.
REGINA: Yeah.
And then there's the
thinking that they're
being mean unreasonably.
They don't need to be this way.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And things like that.
Right?
REGINA: Right.
So just seeing that,
just kind of seeing,
OK, so that's-- that's some
thoughts going through you.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And then there's
the what happened.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And then you said
you feel that way.
But I want to get a little
more into the feelings that are
about what goes on inside you.
So using words that go that way.
So are you feeling angry?
Then I'll feel angry.
JOHN: Angry.
And kind of confrontational
that someone's being rude to me
unnecessarily.
JOHN: Ah.
OK.
Because I view it as
a choice on their end
rather than the way
things are, so to speak.
I'll view it as a--
JOHN: Yeah.
As a conscious
choice to not be nice.
OK.
So that's-- perfect.
REGINA: So then
that ticks me off.
Yeah.
So again, the
thought that they're
making a conscious
choice not to be nice.
They don't need to be this way
and they're-- they're trying
to be mean just for
whatever-- just to be mean.
And so that's like, again, the
thought you're having about
it and the feeling is anger.
Angry, ticked off.
And if you can get
in touch with it
even in this moment
just a little
bit to just-- to let
yourself feel that.
Just to feel in--
REGINA: Mmhmm.
The experience in your
body of it versus sort
of being in your head of
the images and thoughts
about them being mean.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And they have a choice.
But to just be with what's
going on in your body with it.
Because I think that
really helps kind of unhook
from the reaction and
help give you more choice.
Oh, I can feel my--everything
starts boiling a bit.
JOHN: You feel boil--
so how about just
be with that boiling?
-Yeah.
Because we want to get
away from that, right?
REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
We want to like
get me out of this
experience of boiling and--
REGINA: Yeah.
I feel--
- --discomfort.
--a heightened--
elevated heart beat.
JOHN: OK.
I'll feel just kind of the
pressure in my system going up.
JOHN: Yep.
Yep.
To be in this situation.
Because then I start
feeling kind of indignant.
And then depending on what
happens after that--and then
I have to calm myself down.
Yeah.
Well, that should
stay with you.
Just those feelings right now.
REGINA: Yeah.
If you get in touch
with any of them.
REGINA: Yeah.
JOHN: Or even in that moment
if you're in the line.
But to actually just be present
with those experiences--
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And to me what
being present means,
it's like in the
present moment allowing
myself to kind of-- to witness
what's going on and to feel it.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Because we want to
normally get away from it.
But to feel the anger, the
pressure, the tingling all
that stuff you said.
REGINA: Yeah.
To not run away from it, but
to not act out on it either.
To just--or run with
it and indulge it,
but just kind of be with it.
So just do that for a second.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Just kind of feel it in you.
You got that?
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Yeah.
Feeling it?
OK.
Now that-- now to go
to your needs, which
is a core part of the process
of nonviolent communication,
and in our training of
how do you mediate things
within you and with others
in your life to these ideas--
this needs.
So what needs do you think
are not met to you-- for you?
Human needs.
REGINA: Yeah.
Anybody on the planet
might want at this level.
What is it?
At that level, because I have
already charged belief systems
about the whole fact
this even exists,
that's inciting me
before I even get going.
And then I'm layering
that with, you know,
a personality thing that
I'm projecting-- I'm
assuming or projecting on them.
JOHN: Yeah.
And I'm seeing,
as you're saying
that, that the need is simply
to be treated respectfully.
JOHN: Treated with respect.
-And fairly.
JOHN: And fairly.
Fairly and respectfully.
Yes.
Yeah.
And fairly-- fairness is also--
REGINA: [INAUDIBLE]
Like means with a
certain level of--
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Because fairness sometimes
can be-- oh, it's unfair.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
So does fairness mean for you
like being treated with care?
With consideration?
REGINA: Respect.
Basic human respect.
-Respect.
Kind of basic human respect.
-Yeah.
Like I'm not trying
to make you--
JOHN: Yeah.
-Ruin your day.
Please don't try to ruin mine.
Kind of basic--
With a certain level of like
you-- there's a mattering,
there's a care,
there's a respect.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And wanting people
to treat each other
with that basic
level of respect.
REGINA: Right.
So how is it for you
in this moment just
to be with that,
of wanting that?
Even separate-- I mean,
beyond this situation.
Just like how much you
would like for yourself,
for others, for people to treat
each other with respect, care?
Well, the first feeling that
comes up is it makes me sad.
JOHN: Sad.
-That people--
JOHN: Yeah.
--feel it's OK to
do that to each other.
JOHN: Yeah.
So sad-- now more sadness?
Yeah.
I think so.
JOHN: Sadness.
Sadness.
It's sad.
I don't like-- and I
don't like watching it
when it's happening
with other people.
I don't like-- I don't
like the whole scene.
JOHN: Yeah.
I don't like
watching old people
have to get up out of their
wheelchairs to be patted down.
JOHN: Yeah.
-I don't like any of it.
It makes me sad that we've
gotten to this place.
Yeah.
-Yeah.
So which is a different
experience then that anger,
ticked off, reacting that way.
REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah?
Do you feel a little
different when you're touched
with those or your needs--
REGINA: Oh, yeah.
It makes sad.
-And you're feeling sad.
REGINA: It makes me
feel a little teary.
Yeah.
-Yeah.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
So for me, that's a shift.
That's a very different place to
be in that I believe you'd have
more options right now to
respond in a way that would
better meet your needs
for respect and care
and those kind of things,
that you could take action
in a way that would
meet those needs
and more likely create that
with these other people.
But there is another step in
this-- there are two steps.
REGINA: OK.
-Can we do that real quick?
REGINA: Yeah, sure.
Because often we might just--
we could just stop there.
Another word was popping up.
Powerlessness.
JOHN: Ah.
OK.
That's a big one.
Powerlessness.
JOHN: Powerlessness.
OK, so if that's--
They can kick me
off the flight.
They can make sure I don't
get-- make my flight.
They have the power to do that.
JOHN: Yeah.
If I don't obey.
If I'm not a good
person in their mind.
JOHN: Uh huh.
Right.
So maybe some more thoughts--
REGINA: Yeah.
--like, if I don't obey, I
need to be good or obedient,
but--
REGINA: Yeah.
Obedient.
Right.
And some images there.
REGINA: Yeah.
Around people making me be
this way or something, right?
REGINA: Yes.
Feeling powerlessness.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
The feelings.
And then to the need, getting
back down to the need again.
So the need for
power, for choice,
for-- what do you think-- what's
the best word that-- is it
power?
Is that the need for
you that isn't met
that you would like to be met?
A sense of power?
A sense of my own autonomy.
JOHN: Autonomy.
-Yeah.
JOHN: OK.
That I'm my own
sovereign being.
JOHN: Sovereign being.
And I don't want
to be violated,
nor do I want to
violate the other one.
JOHN: Yeah.
I don't want
violations occurring.
JOHN: Yeah.
Yeah.
So autonomy.
So there's a big
buzz around autonomy.
Big buzz around autonomous.
And how is it for you, just
again to sort of check in,
when you go from the
thoughts down to the feelings
and then getting to what is
the need behind all that?
Because that's often
we don't get to.
What is it behind all that?
REGINA: Yeah.
How is to just be--
yeah, I really--
so important for me and others.
Everybody we have autonomy,
as well as respect and care.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
-Yeah.
How is that?
-That feels very clear.
That's a very clear feeling.
JOHN: Like a kind
of a grounding--
It's very grounding.
That this is someone
that everyone deserves.
JOHN: Yeah, yeah.
-You know?
To have their own
sovereignty as a human.
JOHN: And that's what you--
you want that for everybody.
For you and everybody.
Yeah.
To own their own sovereignty
and autonomy for their choosing
how they want to
be in the world.
Mmhmm.
Including them.
I mean, I've had some
really nice ladies too
and they're very clear with me.
JOHN: Yeah.
They hate their jobs.
A lot of them hate their jobs.
And they're single mothers.
They need the paycheck.
They've been through
some rough stuff.
Oh, yeah.
You're starting to
go automatically
to this next step.
REGINA: Yeah.
Which is empathy for the other.
So in terms of mediating
our experience, for me
it's not-- there's
always at least two.
There's the kind of
the self and the other.
And if I can put
myself into this role
of holding as the mediator
perspective on any situation.
So we've given you
some understanding
of what's going on in you,
try to get underneath that.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
-Which can be very calming.
And it seemed like that had
some effect just going, yeah.
Settling, right?
REGINA: Yeah.
But then to go to the other.
Trying to understand the other.
And you're already
starting to go there.
So in terms of that terse voice,
the treating you in this way
that you were talking
about, what do
you think might be their world?
What's going on for them?
If you tried to step
into their world
for a minute of
why they'd be doing
and what they're thinking,
feeling, wanting?
What do you think's
going on there?
Say more about that.
I think that I feel
that sometimes they're
just having a bad--
I imagine they're
probably having a bad day.
JOHN: Yeah.
And I know-- I've learned over
time they're being watched.
They're on camera.
And they have a lot of--
JOHN: So maybe they're
scared about being watched.
They're scared.
And I had one situation
where the woman
was being very, very invasive.
I mean, some of these pat downs
go against TSA regulations.
They really touch
your private parts.
It's not nice.
JOHN: Mmhmm.
And others, they'll choose to
go through all of your things
and literally do a powdering
of every item in your suitcase.
It's not necessary.
I know the TSA regulations.
Meaning that was a choice
to do it for some reason.
JOHN: Yeah.
And one woman
that was very heavy
handed about the whole thing.
And I said, why are you
choosing to do this?
You don't have to make
either of us this miserable.
And she said three
times in almost
like I'm trying to give you
information here with my eyes
that she said, I need this job.
And so I got she really
couldn't afford to lose her job
and she had someone
watching her.
JOHN: Mmhmm.
And so she was trying
to impress someone
while she was training
another person
that had just come on board.
And I mean while I was
ratcheted up, I thought, OK.
Back off.
Quit asking her questions.
She's afraid of losing her job.
Mmhmm.
REGINA: I'm just thankful
I'm not in her position
to have that job.
-Mmhmm.
REGINA: I wouldn't
want that job, so--
Yeah.
REGINA: And it did.
So thinking about this person--
REGINA: Yeah.
That maybe she was a
bit scared underneath.
REGINA: Yes.
And concern for her own
security and well being that
would come by having the job.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And so that maybe that-- even
though you don't like the way
she was meeting
her needs, right?
REGINA: Right.
And some of the other
people you're thinking of.
But that if we can connect to
the human need behind it, then
that can sort of soften
and create a sense
of compassion and connection?
REGINA: Yeah.
So how is it for
you to get into maybe
that is me trying to meet
this need for well being?
Yeah, that
actually-- at the end
of that particular
encounter, which
was one of the rough ones,
I basically said, look.
Anything I said here by way
of pushing back against you
is not personal.
I understand you need your job.
It's just so
frustrating I sometimes
just-- I can't help it.
JOHN: Mmhmm.
I can't help myself just
saying something back.
I feel really violated.
And I told her that.
And I said, I know it's
not your fault. Yeah.
Yeah.
So going to the third part is
what you might do differently.
What you're learning
is from that.
What new possibilities
arise from being
in touch with your
needs for respect,
autonomy, those kind of needs.
The other person's
needs may be for well
being and wanting security.
REGINA: Well, what can I do?
I mean, what would I
do in that situation?
Now that I know, really
I want just autonomy
and basic human respect.
JOHN: Yes.
And I don't need to
reeducate them about 9/11.
I need to just maybe
skip that part.
Yeah.
So what could you do that
would meet your needs
for that and maybe somehow
taking into account their needs
for their own well
being and security
and trying to do their good job.
REGINA: Maybe the
best thing would be--
Do you think it's also
maybe about contribution?
Wanting to like contribute
and feel good about how
they're contributing to safety?
Some of them are.
I mean, one lady said she
was in a military family,
raised that way.
And it was security.
So one thought
might be that just
struck me is maybe
I need to just ask
them how their day is going.
JOHN: OK.
Right off the bat,
how's your day going?
JOHN: How's your day going?
And just go in--
maybe go into resonance
a little sooner than apologizing
for my part of it later.
JOHN: Uh huh.
-Would that be a way to do it?
Yeah.
So that's an-- I mean, you
might have more ideas too.
But that sounds like it just--
the idea popped into your head,
right?
REGINA: Yeah.
A new idea.
And that's what I find.
When we do this
empathy for ourselves
and try to do empathy for the
other person imagining what
might be going on for them
at the more human level
through their feelings
and their needs,
then often these ideas just
pop in, these new possibilities
for taking action.
That makes total sense.
I mean, even just
stopping it right there.
If we-- so we have time
to talk about someone.
You can send me a
bill, by the way.
[LAUGHTER]
If we go on this long.
But, no.
I mean, that makes sense.
I can see what I really want and
I feel very hurt that humanity
is being violated.
JOHN: There's a sadness there.
A sadness.
Yeah.
Because the-- and
the being violated,
the effort is to shift the
thought of being violated
to seeing these
behaviors you don't like
and then connecting to
the need for respect,
autonomy, consideration.
Kind of basic treatment--
And give it out first.
Give it to the
other person first.
And just set a different
pattern and rapport.
I'll try that when I got home.
That's something you can--
DIA is the most harsh airport.
[LAUGHTER]
I'll send them a bill too.
Yeah.
Send them a bill too.
I'll be flying out
tomorrow, and so I'll
let you know how that goes.
But no, I could feel it.
I was starting to get teared
up and I was starting to feel
what was really underneath it.
And so this is wonderful.
It's an example.
Because I think a
lot of people feel
they're losing their
autonomy in a lot of ways.
The presence of CHP, the
presence of-- just the presence
of authoritative
figures in our lives
pressing down on us when we're
already under a lot of stress
right now as a civilization.
JOHN: Mmhmm.
I mean, these are
pressure filled times.
JOHN: Yeah.
Yeah.
And you and I were talking
off camera about this.
When it starts ratcheting up--
and this is in everybody--
well, not everyone.
But most people are
feeling the stress.
They may try to dissipate
it through meditation
and manage it.
But we're almost feeling this
boiling frog syndrome going
on where the pressure is on.
JOHN: Mmhmm.
And so your overview
first for every one of us
and what we need to do,
I mean using the example
we just used as well.
We have to catch how we're
feeling instantly, right?
Catch it early.
REGINA: Catch it early.
And to me it's a practice.
So if I can-- I try to have
a daily-- in our training
we all invite people.
Have a daily practice of
presence and self-connection
to notice when we get triggered.
Sometimes we don't
notice for a while
and we get all ratcheted
up and it's really
hard to do anything about it.
So to notice it
earlier and earlier.
REGINA: You can feel
it in your body.
Yeah.
-Yeah.
It's the practice of paying
attention to your body.
A lot of times we
kind of live up here.
But to pay more-- to have
a daily practice of being
focused in the body a
little more, being aware of
am I noticing?
Am I getting triggered?
And then something that I
learned as far back as when
I was in college and deeply
enamored with Mahatma Gandhi
and the practice of
nonviolence as a way to respond
to oppressive forces in the
world and conflict-- basically
conflict.
That was your way
into all of this.
That was my way in.
That I just was so taken with
what this man had come up with
and the power.
I saw amazing power
on this huge level.
And it literally
toppled in India
the power of the British
Empire at that time.
And so what were you
taking away from that?
Yeah.
So what I took-- yeah.
What I took away from
that is-- and it's
been years of really
unpacking and what-- you know,
what did I learn from that?
And what I would say now is that
the incredible power of being
willing to be present
to and face and confront
in the sense of just meet
and be with those deepest
fears and that rage and anger,
whatever boils up in us.
Because we want you to run
away from that inside or we
want to lash out and blame
others and take-- but if I can
just-- if I can-- and I
saw that Gandhi do that.
That was the principle
of nonviolence.
That he was willing
to suffer, to die.
REGINA: Totally committed.
And he inspired everyone else.
That that was freedom.
That was power.
If you could sit with
your own deepest fears
and stay present
and not-- and then
you could be present to
whatever fears are trying to be
stimulated from the outside.
But if we can be present to that
fight, flight, freeze in us.
That-- it's such a deep
biological reaction.
It's so powerful.
And if we're being honest--and
if we're being honest,
everybody can feel
the second it starts.
JOHN: In everybody.
You know it.
Yeah.
-Yeah.
We might call it
different things.
But it-- it's-- yeah.
It's a very powerful experience.
So the commitment is to
be willing to acknowledge
it and do something about it.
Instead of what we talked
about in the very beginning,
having these chemicals basically
take you on their own journey
into a very screwball
emotional journey.
JOHN: Yes.
Yeah.
So being willing
to be with it first.
To me I've found
more and more how
important that first step is.
To notice.
And be with it in a way
that I'm not just letting--
I'm not reacting to it.
I'm not-- I'm not--
I'm just being with it.
I'm not doing anything else.
I'm not going to blame
for the other anymore.
I'm trying to let go of
all my thoughts and stuff.
And can just feel
it and be with it?
And then can I go into empathy?
If I'm willing?
REGINA: Yes.
And you have to be willing.
You have to be really willing.
If you have a real
bone with somebody
it's harder for people.
JOHN: It's harder, but that's
why we start with-- notice
how I started with you.
-Yeah.
When we did the
situation with you,
I didn't ask you
to go right away,
what's going on with
the other person?
Because, right?
We need-- usually we
need the empathy first.
We need to get
underneath our reactions
and all that to get into, what
are those needs underneath?
Those-- that tender place of
what we really care about.
REGINA: Right.
And when you got
there, you said
you started to feel moved and
touched and kind of what I saw
is like you got
tuned into a bigger
picture of what you care about.
REGINA: Right.
And you got to
sadness and mourning.
But I sensed also that
inspiration of, yeah.
That's what I want
for this world
and for myself and others.
So if we give ourselves
that, if we can do that,
then I think we can
really be willing to be
present to another's experience.
-Yeah.
Because that defused the
chemical cascade enough
that it's like, oh, I
see what's going on.
I'm really sad about what's
happened around here.
JOHN: Yeah.
Right.
And so, you know,
that's starting
from a completely different--
JOHN: It's very different.
--kind of motivation, even.
And you've dealt with this
even in tribal situations
in Afghanistan, had some
really interesting experiences.
JOHN: Yes.
Couples internationally
over Skype
who would have torn each
other's hair out if they
could have gotten together.
So we're going to talk about
all that when we come back.
We're going to
take a short break.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're back.
And thank you for
that, by the way.
That was very helpful.
I hope that you got something
out of it in your own way
from that.
And a lot of people have
problems with something else.
I mean, this is
something that is almost
an epidemic in this country.
Well, Italy and some
other countries too.
And that's road rage.
And before we get into your
experience in Afghanistan
and also mediating between
couples and some things
your kids taught
you-- so we have
a lot to do in this half hour.
We have one other case
that I find absolute--
[LAUGHTER]
--absolutely hysterical.
Christie is sitting here and
she's thinking, oh, really?
I have to do this?
Christie lived in Los Angeles.
And she had a problem
with the rude behavior
of the other driver.
And so Christie, if
you would like to help
share how you dealt with this.
It's-- you had a unique
way of dealing with it.
I did.
I had a kind of
a giant megaphone
like you would see in the
1920 cheerleader type--
[LAUGHTER]
--megaphone with the
handle on the bottom.
And I would just point it out
the window and let her rip.
Expletives deleted often times.
Or sometimes it would
just be as simple
as I might point it
out the window and go,
we do not give
rides to strangers.
And, you know, so it
was very satisfying.
[LAUGHTER]
See, she was
having a satisfying
outcome from this, right?
JOHN: Uh huh.
Well, yeah.
So there-- I mean, there's
not as much incentive
to change if you feel
satisfied with your behavior.
But was there anything
you weren't-- I mean,
were you feeling that
rage response in you.
That wasn't--
-I definitely was.
Yeah, OK.
So that-- there was some
satisfaction in being
able to express something, to do
something that would let people
know that you weren't happy
with what they were doing.
Right.
But then there's
a high cost to pay,
maybe, of just how much you
were in turmoil inside of you.
Yeah?
Very definitely.
Well, I was in my
20s at the time.
So it was quite a long time ago.
-Yeah.
And I'm not sure the road
rage idea was out there
the way we think of it today.
Mmhmm
I think it was just
coming into being,
which is why I had to eventually
get rid of my megaphone.
[LAUGHTER]
But you still have issues
when people cut you off.
It's not like the whole
problem went away.
No.
It definitely doesn't.
But I have thought-- I have
quite a commute here every day.
About an hour on the freeways.
Mmhmm.
And I think of the
car as my classroom.
To get in there and
recognize when I'm doing it.
And have different
things that I can do.
So do you pay
attention then to your--
Oh, I totally do.
And you start to have that
reaction go off in you?
I totally do.
And then is there practice you
have around kind of how you--
-Yes.
- --are present being with that.
How you're--
-I might think about skipping.
You know, you can't think about
skipping or skip-- you know,
like little kids do.
-Uh huh.
And not change your state.
JOHN: So you have an
image that you bring
into mind that helps you shift.
-Mmhmm.
Yeah.
OK.
I think road rage is
a terrific way to work
on your spiritual development.
Yeah.
I do too, actually.
Anything that has that kind
of strong reaction to it,
can I stay with it?
Mmhmm.
And then make a conscious
choice to do something else?
Something in terms
of the work that I do
and how to mediate that
experience within yourself
and I'm imagining
maybe with the other,
but that to get to what--
because sometimes we don't
consciously-- we implicitly
it might be-- but we don't
consciously get there,
is what needs that anger
and that it comes up in you
to name, what is it that's
important to you
that's not being
met by what you see going on?
Is it--
Well, I think it's
the obvious things.
You somehow-- someone has
done something against you,
I guess would be the most
obvious way to look at it.
So, yeah.
I'm glad you said that.
Because that, I would say-- call
that a thought that we have.
Yeah.
They've done
something against me.
Yeah?
I think we're talking about
power here because we're
in large metal machines.
Uh huh.
OK.
So the thought they're
doing something against me.
They have-- there's something
about something power.
So maybe that's they
need then, to have power.
And a perception that maybe
there's a threat to power
or something like that, so--
-Mmhmm.
I think the size of the
automobile that you are--
[LAUGHTER]
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
JOHN: [INAUDIBLE]
truck or something.
It has something to do with it.
JOHN: Yeah.
Safety.
So safety.
Yes.
-Right.
When I had my
megaphone I was driving
around in a Ford Fiesta.
JOHN: Yeah.
Of course that might have
been part of my road rage.
JOHN: Yeah.
-But that I was a small car.
Yeah.
OK.
So is it power and safety?
Do those words touch into--
-Mmhmm.
I think so.
--what it is that-- kind
of at the bottom of it.
What's getting
triggered and what
you really want that your
word might not be met.
Power, safety.
Anything else?
Or that feel like that names it?
That names it.
I think that's a
good description.
And how is it-- I know you're
not having the reactions full
blown right now.
But just getting to naming it
explicitly of not just what
I think they're doing,
being against me
and being disrespectful
or rude or something.
But to get to, oh, that's
what I really want.
I think it's far more-- I
detect far more subtle shifts
in how I'm feeling that
the other driver is
reacting against me.
In fact, it may be
something as subtle
as they're driving too close.
You know?
I'm perceiving that
they're tailgating me.
JOHN: Uh huh.
Yeah.
So you perceive that.
And then is that also
then--is it about safety?
Or is it about--
-Yes.
Yeah.
So--
Definitely because
I'm on the freeway.
Getting close.
Yeah.
That it's potentially
a dangerous situation
if someone's driving
in that kind of way.
It's a very-- you
know, but people
consider our highways
as a real classroom
for the spiritual path.
JOHN: Yeah.
First of all, we're all
connected on that freeway.
It's an artery traveling.
And if somebody does something
that causes an accident,
it's affecting all of us.
Mmhmm.
So I consider that as well.
Yeah.
And for me part of the practice,
the spiritual practice,
is can I name-- can I get
connected to what is it when
I'm having this reaction?
Because I like
your idea of going
to some positive image that
shifts me out of that, right?
Mmhmm.
So that's a-- that's
certainly one action to take.
But I think from
my experience it
can be very powerful
to get to what is
at the bottom of that reaction.
And then what could I do to
shift my experience of it.
Mmhmm.
But sometimes just being
able to get to what it is.
Those needs.
Safety.
Power even.
Yeah.
Safety, power, consideration.
Whatever it might be.
-Mmhmm.
And to me that's the practice.
Because then in any situation,
right, we get triggered.
Whether it's on the road or--
-Right.
In any kind of situation.
And for me, if I can get more
and more fluency at getting to,
oh, what is it that's going
on in me that I'm wanting
at that kind of human level?
And then oft-- sometimes,
like what Regina was saying,
that these-- or found that
this new idea, this kind
of new possibilities come.
To what request could I make
of myself or what could I do?
What action could I take that
actually meets those needs?
So to have kind of new
insights about that.
And something we didn't do
that I did with Regina--
and I don't think we
have time right now.
But-- and if you wanted
it-- to, oh, what
could be going on for them?
So there's the empathy--
-Mmhmm.
Absolutely.
There's the empathy
for ourselves, right?
And trying to get to the bottom.
But then there's also, wow.
What could be-- because this
stepping into the reality
of another person.
I think it's so hard for us
as human beings when we get
triggered--
Right.
-- --to want to go
over there and, what?
How could they be
seeing the world?
How could reality be
showing up for them?
And we can pretty much guess.
And what their needs are.
We're so stressed out
and upset, of course,
the likelihood is they're
going through a very similar
experience in their own way.
JOHN: Then maybe
they're very stressed.
-Yeah.
-And trying to-- yeah.
Which is true of all of us.
I mean, it does feel like a
bit of a tinderbox right now.
Yeah.
So when he was asking you
that question, Christie,
did something pop into your
mind about what you could
do to somehow preempt
those feelings
or the reactions in the future?
Anything you haven't done yet
that you got a new insight.
It's always a process.
I'm always working on it.
[LAUGHTER]
And I do feel like I'm
making tremendous progress.
JOHN: Yeah.
Yeah.
So you're almost a
reformed road rager.
I'm say-- I would
say I'm in recovery.
Uh huh.
You're in recovery.
Christie, I really
appreciate your
coming and sharing your story.
[LAUGHTER]
Because it's one of the
goofiest ones I've heard.
[LAUGHTER]
I kind of like that strategy.
It's got a lot of--
You know what?
Yours my favorite
right alongside--
Creativity.
--the fellow in
Arizona who wore
the gorilla costume to beat
the cameras on the freeway.
You're right there with him.
Creative.
CHRISTIE: Well,
thank you very much.
You're so welcome.
Thanks for doing this for us.
-Very nice to meet you.
It's nice to meet you too.
And thanks for staying
late for work today.
Appreciate it.
-Very happy to do it.
And I think your wireless
so you can get up if you
feel comfortable doing so.
CHRISTIE: Thank you.
Thank you.
OK.
So now I want to find out--
JOHN: Yeah.
Now we want to go
past road rage to rage
when we're talking war zones.
-War zone rage.
Yeah.
We're talking-- now
how-- just briefly, how
did you end up in Afghanistan?
Because I know Marshall.
JOHN: Yeah.
Who was the one that really
created this--the whole system
of nonviolent communication?
JOHN: Yes.
The protocols for it?
JOHN: Yeah.
That you've been seeing here.
JOHN: Yes.
Marshall was supposed to go.
What happened?
Yeah.
So this was early 2002 right
after the-- 9/11 had happened
and the bombings in Afghanistan.
And Marshall Rosenberg,
who is my long time mentor
for over 15 years now, he had
decided to go into the-- he'd
been invited by
somebody in Pakistan
to go and work in the refugee
camps along the border.
So there's this--
just at that point
especially, just
tons-- so millions
of people on the border there.
REGINA: Right.
Afghani refugees.
And he was going to
go into the camps.
And my colleague Ike Lasater
and I. We said, hey, Marshall,
can we go with you?
It sounded adventurous,
exciting and all that.
He said, sure.
And your intention
was you were going
to create a nonviolent,
peaceful communication
between warring factions.
JOHN: Yeah, we were
going to do a training.
Well, we were going
to do training.
OK.
We were going to offer
these skills and approaches
to going working on conflict.
REGINA: OK.
So what happened?
So Marshall-- it
was too dangerous.
Marshall decided, this
is way too dangerous.
The State Department had
been putting out notices.
Do not go to Pakistan.
By all means, do not go
to the northwest frontier
province area of Pakistan.
And that's exactly where we
had-- were intending to go.
So Marshall said, no way.
And for some crazy reason
Ike and I decided to go.
REGINA: Hey, your bags
were packed, right?
He had already gone ahead.
And I just--you know,
Marshall I'm gonna--
and he was like, do not.
Don't go.
And I-- I don't know.
I just feel so compelled.
So I-- we went.
And we had a quite a
harrowing adventure
of trying to do this
without him being there
and making our way from
Karachi in the south
all the way up to
Islamabad and then up
into the Northwest
frontier province.
And we got into the camps and
we were there for three days
total.
And we had this naive
idea we'd just kind
of walk in and do a workshop.
[LAUGHTER]
And--
Was there something as like a
language barrier, for example?
Oh.
Had you considered some
of those smaller nuances?
We had translator.
Well, we had a translator.
But English was not--
-No, that's not the--
- --his strong suit.
-Yeah.
And he knew nothing about
nonviolent communication.
And-- but we gave
him a crash course.
And we got up into the-- found
a way to get into the camps.
And it took a couple days of
just listening to their pain.
They just-- they didn't--
REGINA: One can only imagine.
They just-- so much pain
related to the US, the Soviets.
Just all that has been happening
their country for so long.
So we did a lot of
listening for a while.
And we could see-- and we
threw all these-- there
were about maybe eight
different languages
that were being spoken.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And the different elders
that showed up each day
to meet with us, there were like
maybe 30 to 40 or maybe even
more each day.
And when we were
listening to them, even
through this translation
that was often very complex
and I don't know how accurate,
that you could see that we'd
make an empathy guess.
We'd just say, you're
feeling this way
because you have these needs
and they're not being met
and you're in so
much pain about it.
And they'd sit back at
times, and then their eyes
would kind of glisten, moisten.
Like they got really heard.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
-You know?
And they saw us as
representing the US and West.
REGINA: Right.
And then the third day,
they had been very hospitable
and they asked us
to go to the mosque,
if we'd go to the
mosque with them.
And immediately half the room--
it's, again, about 40 elders.
Say, no.
That's not right.
That's wrong.
You can't do that.
And they started to
fight right in the room.
They just, you know--this
energy level shot up.
REGINA: Yelling at
each other and--
And yelling and just--
zsh zsh zsh, you know?
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And I calmed and
I turned to Ike
and I said, Ike, we
finally have our conflict.
Because we couldn't really get
a good situation to work on.
This is it.
We've got a conflict to show
them how we can do this.
REGINA: Yeah.
And he looked at me
like, are you crazy?
You know?
This is a religious
conflict here.
But I was too excited
to get-- notice.
And we got everybody
calmed down.
And I ended up
bringing up one person
from each side of
that conflict and I
spent the day mediating between
them in our-- with our process.
And I got that the
needs from one side
would say-- say the
side-- the person
representing the side
that wanted us to come.
You could--you maybe could
imagine the needs that he was
trying to meet by asking us.
REGINA: Right.
Hospitality.
Connection.
Being able to have a sense
of inclusion and community.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And so, you know, those kind
of needs that he was trying
to meet and the others that
were supportive of that
to want us to come.
And then on the other
side, got to get him
clear on what he was wanting.
Not just what he
thought what was
wrong about the other guy
and the other approach,
but what he was wanting.
And that had to do with respect
and safety for the traditions.
You're hearing the same words.
Doesn't matter which
one of us speaking this.
JOHN: It's universal.
Human respect thing.
And sovereignty.
JOHN: The respect.
Sovereignty.
Yeah.
But there-- it is
also about honoring.
REGINA: Honoring, yes.
Honoring the
traditions and safety.
REGINA: Right.
This having these
outsiders come
in and be in a sacred space.
So it's about honoring the
sacred and being and real sense
of safety and protection
of their space.
So I got the needs.
And I asked them to
say back to each other
what they heard each
other's needs are.
All right?
And I mean, we
have to imagine this
isn't like just a little
tiff between a boyfriend
and girlfriend.
JOHN: No, this is--
We're talking about such
deeply entrenched differences.
JOHN: Yeah.
And a history of conflict.
And even fear and hatred.
JOHN: Yeah.
Yeah.
Deep, deep conflict in
that part of the world.
And so, yeah.
This was-- but I was just going
through the process with them.
And they did it.
They ended up acknowledging
what the other person
said they wanted.
And then I turned
to the whole group--
because there was just
I was working with.
The whole group was watching.
And I said, does anybody in this
room not have all those needs?
All of them?
REGINA: Mmhmm.
There's this pin drop silence.
And then there was just sort of
smiling and nodding and, yeah.
Like, yeah.
They got it.
And then I asked
them, how about we all
work together and see
if we can find a way
to get all those needs met?
And there again there
were sort of just looks
of surprise on some faces.
And then I started-- we
started to look at how could--
what would be some
ideas, some strategies
to get those needs met?
It didn't actually take all
that long at that point.
A lot of it was just
getting connected.
REGINA: Sure.
Getting understanding
and connection.
REGINA: Well, that makes sense.
At this-- to get
out of the thinking
that's about right and wrong
and who's right and who's wrong,
who's good, who's bad.
And all that.
To get to a connection.
And then once that happened,
the solution came pretty--
didn't take all that long.
It went through
a few iterations.
REGINA: Yeah.
And then when we got
there, to the solution
that they both
agreed to--and then
I turned to the whole room.
And I said-- well, first I
said, so this solution, which
happened to be we sit right
outside the door and somebody
would sit with us and they could
tell us what's going on but we
wouldn't actually go in.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
So that went through
a number of exchanges.
But then-- everybody-- so
does that meet your needs
for hospitality and connection?
And yes.
Does this meet your needs
for respect and honoring
the traditions and safety?
Yes, it does.
And I turned the whole room
and I said, so we did it?
So that's it?
And again, there
was this pin drop.
REGINA: Aw.
-Really.
What a wonderful moment.
JOHN: It was just this-- and
then they started clapping.
Oh.
Haha.
And cheering.
Really.
The whole room
exploded with energy.
Oh, that is so wonderful.
Of people smiling and happy.
And I-- my--
REGINA: But look at that.
And every person is
looking for these things.
Yeah.
To work it out in that way.
REGINA: Yeah, and
to work it out--
Through connection.
REGINA: Yeah, instead of
[INAUDIBLE] each other.
Through understanding
and working together.
REGINA: Right.
So they collaborated
to find a solution
that met everybody's needs.
And they were all
excited about that.
And at the very end, the
most senior elder in the camp
came up to us.
And he said, oh, I like
very much what you did.
I try to do things like
that, but, you know, that was
I was really nice what you did.
REGINA: Aw.
And he said, if we knew
how to do this we wouldn't
have to fight any more.
-OK.
So what better
endorsement is there?
JOHN: Yeah.
For having chosen
that line of work.
That dharma in your
lifetime to have
brought that to these people.
JOHN: Yeah.
And who knows what
the trickle down effect
was among those people
and their families even.
JOHN: Yeah.
And that's where
I'd like to go next.
You have done some
intense mediation
with couples who find
themselves so entrenched they
just can't find their way out.
And just to take
five minutes or so
about maybe a couple
of cases where
there was such polarization.
JOHN: Oh, yeah.
And you were able to bring
such healing between them.
Maybe give us a couple
examples so we can see what's
possible in case anyone
out here listening to this
thinks you're in an absolutely
impossible situation
and you have no options
in terms of how to engage
with the other person.
Let's hear this.
-Mmhmm.
Yeah.
Well, I regularly come
across those situations
that seem impossible.
That the conflict
is just too big.
There's too much hurt.
There's too much pain.
And this one that
you referenced,
this couple that I worked
with, they were divorced.
And they were having
issues around child support
and visitation and things.
And they were-- but
they hadn't actually
spoken to each other
for years because they
couldn't tolerate even
having any conversation
with each other at all.
And so I talked to them
individually beforehand.
And they just
basically said, well,
I don't think-- this is--
there's no hope, really.
Because I have absolutely no
trust of the other person.
They both said-- pretty much
the exactly the same thing.
REGINA: The trust us gone.
I've been completely betrayed
and I'm deeply just hurt
and I have no trust and
there's just no hope.
But we don't have
to go to court.
And it was going to be a
big, terrible legal battle.
And they wanted to try to-- this
was like a last ditch effort.
You were the last ditch effort.
Right.
Last effort, right.
But they both were
saying, I can't imagine
how we can work through this.
Because there's just so much.
Now they weren't in
the same room, right?
No.
Because they couldn't even
bear to be in the same room.
One was in a European
country and one
was in the United States.
And so--
REGINA: And his was Skype--one
of them was Skyped in.
Yeah.
We were all Skyped.
REGINA: OK.
-Skyping.
The three of us.
Yeah.
And this took place
over many sessions.
So lots of individual work
with them to prepare them.
Like what I did
with you, you know?
That empathy for
themselves and then
trying to imagine some
empathy for what was
going on for the other person.
And so a lot of work preparing.
And then-- and then a number--
a number of sessions meeting
with them together.
And one of the key things
that I helped them do
is to notice when they
had an enemy image.
This phrase that
Marshall Rosenberg
has used over the years.
And we picked up on it.
And call it that
process I did with you
an enemy image process.
How do we transform
those images where
we just see an enemy--
even if the people
closest to us, right?
REGINA: Mmhmm.
We can still see the
other that's against us.
REGINA: Right.
Like she was saying.
And so how do we
literally-- not just
have the idea that
we should change it,
but actually it dissolves away.
So during the mediation,
as well as before,
I worked on-- with them on how
to help them notice they had
that image that they
literally weren't, like, kind
of seeing the other person.
They just saw this image.
And help them be aware of that
and catch that and give them
enough support in the
moment to keep trying
to get into-- deeper
and deeper into what
was going on for each
of them that they
were trying to express.
REGINA: They must have had
such deep sadness at the core.
At the core, it was.
It was just tremendous grief.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Yeah.
But it went from this anger
and bitterness and resentment
to a lot of grief.
And they actually started
sharing the grief.
And they shared
things with each other
that they couldn't
hear before that.
Like, there was
more to the story.
The other person didn't quite
know it or couldn't hear it.
And they started being able to
really, like, make sense of,
oh, that's why you did it.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Ah.
That's why you did it.
I could never understand
why you did that.
REGINA: Yeah.
That that stuff started
to come out as well.
The deep grief
for what they went
through, and also the
sadness of the impact
on the other person that--
And imagine what this
was doing to the life.
JOHN: Oh, and the children.
Yeah.
Or rather children.
JOHN: Yeah.
I mean, so what you were
able to help them do,
essentially you
diffused the anger.
You diffused all of the anger
and resentment that goes--
JOHN: Well, it came up a lot.
It just kept coming up.
-Yeah.
And then to catch
it and work with them
and help and-- each one of
them, and help them then
try to hear each other.
Would you say what you're
hearing another person say?
After they got enough
understanding for themselves.
And, yeah.
They got to the point at the
end-- it was very hard work.
It was many times that they
almost couldn't get through it.
But they did.
And we got to the end where they
were genuinely expressing care
and tenderness for each other.
REGINA: Aw.
-And--
So you're saying if it
could happen with them--
JOHN: And they worked together.
-Yeah.
They found a solution
together to all the issues
that they had.
And they both felt
really good about it.
And after that, they were
able to work together
on various issues that came up.
They could talk to
each other again.
They could communicate.
And they had a pretty
good relationship.
Well, congratulations to
all three of you in that one
because they had to
be willing to show up.
Obviously, they were-- the
stakes were high enough.
JOHN: Oh, they worked hard.
And I'm sure there
are many people
listening to this who have
some high stakes going on too.
JOHN: Yeah.
That can feel the
beauty in this process.
I mean you--
JOHN: There is a way.
You would say-- would you say
that unless a person is really
mentally unstable to
the point that they
really-- like psychotic
behavior, for example.
Or this kind of
borderline personalities.
I mean, you can't really work
with someone in that situation,
can you?
Well, I'd-- what you're
pointing to, the challenge is--
REGINA: Yeah.
--a lot higher.
And what I like to be aware
of, though, if I have a label,
if I'm carrying a
label of somebody
of borderline or difficult
person or a narcissist or--
REGINA: Right.
-Right.
Like that.
That what I've
learned over the years
is that that becomes-- if
that's who I see-- if I'm seeing
somebody through that
lens of that label--
and there's a difference
between being really
honest and clear about
what people's behaviors are
like I talked about earlier.
REGINA: Right.
You know?
You can name the observation
of what I see you doing.
But it's a different step
to then take it into what's
the label to put on it.
And if you can keep
that seperate--
So if you've identified-- yeah.
If you've identified, OK,
I see what's going on here.
JOHN: I see the behavior.
-This is borderline person.
JOHN: And I can get
in touch with my--
They're a psychopath-- yeah.
-My unmet needs, right?
-Mmhmm.
So it's a difference
between saying what you are,
psychopath or borderline or
too-- I see these behaviors.
I feel scared,
worried, sad, or angry.
Whatever it might be.
But own my feelings.
They aren't about--
REGINA: Mmhmm.
Telling what's wrong with you.
But it's like, OK.
You're doing this and
I have these feelings.
And then what needs of mine
are not met by your behavior
that I could label in this way?
So have you found
these people--
even if you're taking a pretty
extreme kind of personality
disorder, it can also be
worked with in this way
even if there often isn't an
obvious sense of compassion
or empathy at all?
Maybe empathy appears to be
missing in their behaviors
throughout their lifetime?
JOHN: Yeah.
Right.
Can--and because I want to get
on to your kids in a minute.
From the mouths of babes.
-Yeah.
Just in short, can
people like this still
be worked with through
nonviolent communication
methods?
I like something that
I heard from Marshall
Rosenberg many years ago.
And it's just--it's
reverberated for me ever since.
Is that if we can
do-- if I can focus
my attention and my language
and this way of listening
and empathizing and
using these distinctions
I've been talking about,
then it's inevitable.
REGINA: OK.
That connection
and compassionate
giving and receiving is
another thing I learned.
That that way of being connected
as human beings is inevitable.
REGINA: Regardless
of what's showing up.
If I stay with it.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And that's the thing that--
I think that's the hardest.
We give up because it's so hard.
And some-- being with
certain people, it's
just maybe more than we have
the skill or ability or capacity
or patience to deal with.
But I really-- I found that
over the years in my experience.
If I don't give in to
seeing you as this label
and I keep just seeing
you as doing these things,
not meeting the needs
for me, and what
needs could you be meeting.
So this idea I learned from
Marshall is so precious.
That everything people
do, if we can look at it,
is they're doing the best they
know how to meet their needs.
REGINA: Absolutely.
If they knew a better
way, they would.
REGINA: Beautiful.
And if I can see that,
I don't have to agree
or like their strategies.
I could be horrified by the way
they're meeting their needs.
But that is the best they
are capable of in the moment.
But if I can see
their needs behind it,
I feel a connection as a human
being to human being again.
-Yes.
-We're connected again.
And if I have that,
then there's hope--
there's always a possibility
for me that we can get to some--
OK.
And that's the
really tough stuff.
Let's talk about from
the mouths of babes
and your two little children.
JOHN: Yes.
Do you have a couple
little stories-- that you
just hinted at off camera.
REGINA: Yes.
I'd like hear about
your son, Argin.
JOHN: My son.
And your daughter, Terika.
JOHN: Yeah.
Yeah, so--
Because we-- little kids.
JOHN: Yeah.
-Yeah.
That's where it starts.
And parenting.
Parenting and having a family
has been one of my best
training grounds for--you know?
REGINA: Absolutely.
Mediating conflict.
REGINA: So a couple
little short examples.
JOHN: Yeah.
So Argin.
There was a time a
while-- he's five now.
But it was a little while ago.
And he was--we were about
to have dinner and he
was sitting on the couch.
And we all got to the table.
And I said, Argin, come
over to dinner now.
We're going to have dinner.
Silence.
Argin, would you
come over to dinner?
And, nope.
Nope.
I'm playing.
He had this real kind
of tone to his voice.
Like, no.
You know?
REGINA: Mmhmm.
And I asked him a
few more times kind
of trying to be nice about it.
And then he just,
you know, he wouldn't
answer after-- so I got up
from the table to go over.
And I had this image in my mind.
I was going to take
the toy out of his hand
and bring him over to
the table, you know?
REGINA: Mmhmm.
-And use some--
REGINA: Be the enforcer.
--gentle force to kind
of get him over there.
And, I mean, I notice
that I was triggered.
REGINA: Mmhmm.
I was having-- I
was kind of angry.
A little irritated.
You know?
And I had this image--
things going through my mind
about kind of disrespectful
and not caring about the family
or something like that.
REGINA: Respect again.
-Yeah.
And so I went over and--
but so I noticed it.
And as I got over to
the couch and I just
started to sit down next
to him, I caught myself
and I just took a breath.
I just took a breath.
And I have this-- I
have a lot of training
that I do with myself every
day that helps me to practice
that self-connection, connecting
into my breath, my body
sensations, and some
needs going on in me.
REGINA: Right.
So I just dropped
in there real quick.
Took a moment.
And then I looked up at him.
And I saw-- suddenly I just
saw something on his face
that he looked kind of angry.
But he also-- I
thought I saw something
that looked like sadness.
And so it was like this
fresh seeing of something.
And said, Argin-- and it
just came out of my mouth.
Argin, are you
angry but also sad?
Because-- and I had no idea
I was going to say this.
REGINA: Right.
It just came out in moment--
because I'm going on a trip
tomorrow?
REGINA: Aw.
OK.
And he just--
REGINA: Yeah.
--stopped.
And he looked up at me
with these big brown eyes.
And he didn't say a word.
He just looked up at me.
REGINA: Yeah.
And I interpret
that as thank you.
-Yes.
-For hearing me.
And so you were able to
just stop yourself long
enough to touch in with him.
And this is what we all
need to do for each other.
And we're out of time.
But I want to say it seems to me
that nonviolent communication,
not just coming to you to
help mediate others' lives.
But we need-- this
is something that we
should actually be
able to take advantage
of and develop in ourselves.
And just really quickly,
we only have a couple
seconds left, is that possible?
Can people come in and
do personal training
for their own lives?
-Yes.
Definitely.
-Good.
We teach people how
they can mediate not only
for other people,
help other people,
but how you can mediate your
own conflicts with others
and your own inner
conflicts in a way
that-- with the same
principles of creating
that connection that leads
to this kind of compassion
that happens.
-Yes.
Very good.
Well, well done.
Fabulous work you
do in the world.
We need thousands if not
millions more of you.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you for joining us today.
JOHN: Thank you, Regina.
I hope this has been
enlightening for you.
It certainly has for me.
If you feel you have a need
for a deeper kind of dialogue
with someone you ordinarily
have difficulty with,
you can go to John's website
at mediateyourlife.com
to find out more about
nonviolent communication.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]